Abstract:
1,134,352. Nitride layers. SIEMENS A.G. 1 May, 1967 [2 May, 1966], No. 19916/67. Heading C1A. A nitride of a semi-conductor element (Si, Ge, or B) is deposited as a layer on the heated surface of a semi-conductor crystal by deposition from a reaction gas comprising a halogencontaining compound of the semi-conductor element and a nitrogen compound, the components of the gas being mixed immediately adjacent the heated surface. The halogencontaining compound may be RSiX 3 , RR&lt;SP&gt;1&lt;/SP&gt;X 2 , R 2 R&lt;SP&gt;1&lt;/SP&gt;X, (R 2 N) 2 SiX 2 , (R 2 N) 2 SiX-NRXSi(NR 2 ) 2 , or X 3 Si-NR-SiX 3 , where R and R&lt;SP&gt;1&lt;/SP&gt; are H, alkyl or aryl, and X is Cl, Br, F, or I; preferred compounds are SiCl 4 and SiHCl 3 . The nitrogen compound may be NH 3 , N 2 H 4 , or an alkyl or aryl amine. The reaction gas may also contain a rare gas, H 2 , or N 2 . The semiconductor crystal may be Si, Ge, or a III-V compound, and may have a coating of a metal, SiO 2 , or glass. It may be heated to 400- 800‹ C. by resistance, induction, or gas discharge heating. Ge and B are referred to only.

Description:
PATENT SPECIFICATION No. 266922 class: 21 a1 Int. Cl: H O1 1 expenditure day: 10. December 1968 SIEMENS CORPORATION IN BERLIN AND MUNICH procedure for making a protective layer of a Halbleitersti “kstof heiress dung for Halbleiterzweeke announced on 28 April 1967 (A 4047/67); Priority of the registration in Germany from 3 May 1966 (S! 03,578 IVc/12g) beansp cht. Beginning de., t patent duration: 15. March 1968. As well known SiO2 - Schiehten at the surface of semiconductor components can among other things take over the protection of the pn transitions against humidity disturbances. This is the reason, why at the surface of Planartransistomn, e.g. on silicon basis, such protective layers are present. Apart from this function these protective layers fulfill an important task with the production of such transistors by diffusion. During the production of Planar$xansistomn the semiconductor surface with a z becomes. tl by thermal oxidation produced SiOz layer provided. Become subsequently, individual places of the semiconductor surface of the SiO2 - Sehicht again liberating, in order to receive the possibility of the local penetration of an activator presented in gas form into the semiconductor material. contrary to of the SiO - Schieht released places of the Halbleiteroberlläehe does not find in the places covered with the SiOz layer a penetration of the activator into the semiconductor and/or in only and/or in only sees to imperfect painted instead of. Since in this way manufactured pn transitions do not arrive according to experience at the fmigeIegte semiconductor surface, but under the Sehutzschicht remain, can the SiO - layer with the finished semiconductor component the protection of the pn transitions to take over. The MasldemngsvermOgen of one from SiO2-bestehenden protective layer should be better pronounced however regarding individual activators. One has therefore repeats look out for other protective layer materials held. Recently for this purpose the use of silicon nitride layers is suggested, which are separated dumhReaktion by SiH “and ammonia from the gaseous phase at the surface of the semiconductor metals at increased temperature. In so received Übemügen to leave see by corroding with HF-haltigen acid mixtures for the Diffusien of activators to necessary diffusion windows for the actual semiconductor surface producing. Silicon nitride has better Masldemngseigenschaften as SiOz, particularly with the diffusion of metallic activators, e.g. zinc or Gallinm, and results in high reverse voltages, when they can occur with semiconductor components, which are provided with comparable SiOz protective layers. The application of the silicon nitride Schutzsehichten is in all other respects similar to that of the SiOz protective layers. For example Feldeffekttransistorcn receive a still higher tax sensitivity of the type of the Fieldistoren, if the Steuemlektrode is separate from Halhleiterkörpez by a SilieiumnitridsehZcht in place of an equally strong SiOz layer. In addition, Planartransistomn leave themselves with such protection chiehten to manufacture favourably. The invention strike see with the task to manufacture in favourable way such Silicinmnitridschiehten. One aims at receiving these layers with good meehanischen and chemical Eigenschuften and high compactness as one obtains CH thermal Abseheidung they for example also from volatile Halbleiterstiekstoffverbindungen dt, as far as this already in advance a Silieiumoder contains other semiconductor ticking off connection. Beyond that sees the procedure according to invention for the production of compact layers of nitrogen connections of other semiconductor elements lets as offered and C-ermanium to use, in order to receive to the oxide masking suitable protective layers at the surface from semiconductor components at relatively low temperatures. It is already a procedure besehrieben, which dadumh is characterized that a flüehtiges reaction gas of which as an active component a metal-free gaseous connection between nitrogen and Silicinm and/or germanium contains use finds. To the Durehführung of this procedure suitable connections are e.g. Alk'y! - nnd Arylaminosilane, Alkyl-und Arylaminosilacane and 8ilieiumisocyanat. Such connections are available however often not and must be manufactured particularly. For this reason the invention plans a procedure, which manufactures to a certain extent these connections directly before their how/as the replacement to with the Sehutzsehicht to covering Halbleiterobeffläehe intermediately as improvement, so that one receives compact Siliciumnitridsehichten, which the well-known in favourable way, by direct reaction between the semiconductor and nitrogen and/or by reaction between ammonia and Silicinmwasserstoff developing protective layers both concerning Maskiemngsfähiglosit and concerning its Herste! lungsweise are superior. Accordingly sees the invention refers weeke, in particular at the surface of a semiconductor crystal from Silicinm or germanium or a AIIIBV connection, to a procedure for making a protective layer of a firm semiconductor ticking off connection for Halhleite by thermal and/or elektrotherrnisehe Abseheidtmg of the Halbleiterstiekstoffverbindung from the gaseous phase, which are characterized by that the used reaction gas to one beside halogen the h ehstens still hydrogen and or Alkylbzw. Aryl residues containing connection of a semiconducting element and a volatile, if necessary alkylated Stiekstoffwasserstoffverbindung at the too beschiehtenden semiconductor surface from his components are built up only directly and to the Halbleiteroberfläehe heated up under education from Halbleitemitrid to the reaction brought. The possibility exists of mixing for reaction to components bringing with an inert feed gas. Hiebei is to the use of noble gases to think hydrogen and nitrogen. During the conversion of halogenosilanes, e.g. of SiG14 with NI-Is 4 etc. a white, a nichfflüchtiger, a high-polymere solid body of the gross formula at ambient temperature over unstable intermediate products such as SI (NHz) (SI (NI), form already xth simultaneous firm NH4 CI develops: xSiCI4÷ xöNHs' - (SI (NH) z) n + x4NH4 CI with heating up on higher temperature finally changes this connection under ammonia splitting off over several polymere intermediate stages into powdered, hexagonal Silicinmnitrid of the formula, SisN4. The procedure can be designated D CH the following pattern: -2Nn - NH 6 (SI (NH) z) x &gt; 2 (SI (NI-I) sNz) x &gt; 3 (Siz (NH) zNz) x 2xSi3 N4. Because of their non volatileness (SI OqI l) z) x and its Folgepmdukte are useless for the production of even, holding and gas-tight silicon nitride layers, which are suitable as masking Sehutzsehiehten for the Erzieltmg of a located Diffnsion in Halbleiterobenüäehen. Likewise D can reaction from silicon with nitrogen and/or ammonia, which one usually makes beil300°C be received eh, no the required carrying out Siliefurnnitridsehicht. The Sinn4 developing with such procedures is spread or located as porous layer on the Halbleiterobeffläehe sees in form of loose Kristalinadelu. Furthermore the high temperatures necessary with the acquaintance favour a more uner rünsehtes outdiffusion of Doüemngsstoffen from the Halbleiterktistallen which can be covered. One goes out however according to the theory of the invention of gaseous, dry ammonia and a feed gas loaded with SiHC13 or SiC14 and leads these components directly before the half which can be coated! eitemberfläche together, then separate on in the reaction area the present, on for example 400 Halbleiterseheiben heated up to 800°C transparent close silicon nitride layers. The NH4 c1 developing at the same time separates now at the cold apparatus pieces and/or leaves to a large extent as white smoke with the exhaust gas the reaction container. The reaction takes place after the following equations: a) 3SiCl4 + 4NH &gt; Si3 N4 + 12HCI b) 12HCI + IgNHs) 12NH4 CI e) 3SiCl4 + 16NH3,) SisN4 +I2NH4 CI 800oc one uses arbitrarily halogenisiertes silane (X = possibly an element of the Halogengmppe), then follows a) 3 H (4.n) SiXn + 4NI &gt; SisN4 + nHX + (4-n) H b) n HX + nNHs) nNH4 X c) 3 H (4 - n) SiXn + (4+ n) NHs &gt; Si3 N4 + (4-n) i + nNH4 X in these formulas meant n one of the numbers of 1, 2, 3 and 4. as particularly suitably prove with the production of Siliciumnitridschiehten the connections HSiC1s and SiC14. One sees however! 5 on the other hand that also bromine, iodine and even fluorine silanes are applicable. Just as nitrogen hydrogen connections alkylated of Nile also ttydrazin (NzH4) or can, e.g. in place. Amines, to be used. The solitary nitride layers do not need to correspond to the stoichiometric composition SisN4. They are however in any case in such a manner constituted that they among other things at least exercise at the semiconductor surface festhaften and the protection of the finished semiconductor components opposite atmospheric St6rangen into same extents as SiOs, while they improve one compared with such protective layers opposite metallic activators as gallium or zinc substantially Mastäemngswirkung unfold by varying the separation temperature and the molar ratios, for example the halogenosilanes zumArnmoniak, as well as the portion of SI he connections knows the corroding firmness, which chemical stability, 2g the adhesive strength for photo-sensitive lacquers as well as the resistance are affected to a large extent against chemical Beanspmehungen of the solitary silicon nitride layers. (R is z. tl. Hydrogen or an alkyl residue. ) As far as the parent compounds are not gaseous, they must be evaporated for the purpose of the Durchfühmng of the procedure according to invention. Hiezu most comfortably loading an inert feed gas, hydrogen, ammonia, nitrogen is e.g. reached or a noble gas by introducing or leading up to and/or over the liquid or solid substance. According to invention equipment suitable for the Durchfühmng of the procedure is represented in the design. In one e.g. from quartz existing cylindrical reaction container --1-- is on a landing --2--, like it e.g. with the normal semiconductor epitaxy from the gaseous phase, that is used with the Silieiumnitridschicht semiconductor metal which can be provided --3-- arranged. ZurDeheizung of the crystal, which takes place appropriately on at least 800°C, knows a direct electrical heating by means of resistance heating --4-- using the landing --2-- as heating resistor intended its. Another possibility consists of that one from leading and heatproof Materia! existing landing energy by effect of the Induktionsfeldes of a hochfrequenzdurchflossenen coil --5-- supplies and on reaction temperature brings. The used up ReaktiQnsgase leaves the reaction container over the departure --6--. The Frischgaszufuht consists of two parts: the e ne component becomes for example from above over a pipe --7-- to direct into the proximity of the crystal which can be coated --3-- brought. The other component of the reaction gas becomes over a pipe --8-- into the reaction container introduced one recognizes clearly, as the combination of the reaction gas from its components is directly only caused at the semiconductor surface. In order to transport the components into the reaction area, is an evaporator device --9-- with liquid SiHC1s or SiC14 intended, into which a feed gas is introduced, which loads itself with the steam of the liquid component and continues to flow then into the reaction area. If necessary also one of the two components, if it is with standard temperature in gaseous condition, knows e.g. NH from a gas bottle -- 10-- are fed. Likewise well useful Maskiemngsund protective layers is received, if one in place of the halogenosilanes Alkylbzw. Arylhalogensilan¢ of the type I SiX R SiX, RSiX3 or Alkylaminosilaue, e.g. (R2 N) 2 SiX, and/or Alkylaminohalogensilazan, e.g. RzNSiX NR XSiNRz and/or a Halogensilazan, e.g. X3 Si-NR-SiX3, with ammonia and/or a volatile Aminoverbindung at the surface of the semiconductor thermally or electricalthermally (e.g. by Gasentladnngserhitzung) move lä t. (In the above formulas X means an element of the Halogengmppe, in particular chlorine or bromine, and R and/or R' either hydrogen or a Alkylmst CD “an aryl residue. ) It becomes directly understandable that itself also germanium beru. A. semiconductor nitride layers from the gaseous phase on semiconductor surfaces heated up abseheiden, if one uses an agreeing if possible connection of the other Halbleitemlemcnfs concerned in place of a silicon connection of the kind described above. Often metallic or other Schichteu, e.g. from SiOz, is at the semiconductor surface. In this case it is of importance, zn knows that one does not have before to remove such layers before applying the Nitridsehichten according to invention necessarily, then can a semiconductor body, which is covered for a metal and/or SiO2und/oder with a glass layer, with a protective layer on these layers be e.g. provided. To notice it is that the protective layers according to invention with flußsäumhaltigen solvents can be solved easily e.g. also with use of photoresist technology selectively. The reaction takes place as follows: SiaN4 + 22 HF &gt; 8HzSiF “+ 4NH4 F. As determined these layers cannot only be applied on the pure H.albleiteroberfläehe. They can be produced therefore also for the protection of integrated circuits, as it were as Schlußstein. Particularly with such arrangements as well as with high-closing diodes a particularly good Stabilisiemng of the electrical characteristics can be achieved with the help of the protective layers received with application of the according to invention procedure manufacture protective layers.

Title:
Procedure for making a protective layer of a semiconductor ticking off connection for semiconductor purposes

Claims:
1. Procedure for making a Schutzschieht of a firm semiconductor TIC elevator control off connection for semiconductor purposes, in particular characterized in the surface semiconductors of a istalles from Silieium or germanium or a AIIIBV connection, by thermal or electricalthermal separation of the semiconductor ticking off connection from that gaseous phase, thereby that vetwendeteReaktionsgas from one beside halogen at the most still hydrogen and/or Alkylbzw. Aryl residues containing connection of a semiconducting element and a volatile, if necessary for alkylated nitrogen hydrogen dung only directly at too besehiehtend the “n Halbleiteroberfläehe one builds up from his components and at the semiconductor surface heated up under education from semiconductor nitride to the reaction one brings.
2. Procedure according to requirement 1, by characterized that a halogenosilane, an in particular SiC14 or a SiHC and a ammonia at the surface of the semiconductor crystal heated up purpose formation of a silicon nitride coat to the reaction are brought to that of kind of.
3. Procedure according to requirement I or 2, by characterized that as the semiconductor supplying component of the reaction gas Alkylbzw. Aryl halide silanes to be used.
4. Procedure after one of the requirements l to S, thereby characterized that as halbleiterliefemde component of the reaction gas Alkylaminohalogensilane and/or Alkylaminohalogensilazane with ammonia and/or a volatile Aminoverbindung are converted. Procedure after one derAnsprüchel bis4, thereby characterized that the Halb46 leader ticking off connection, in particular silicon nitride, on which on a temperature between 400 to 800oc semiconductor surface heated up is separated.
